# Online conferences are opportunities to be truly inclusive - don’t stop after the pandemic

The pandemic forced us to embrace online conferences (Nature 582, 135-136,
2020). Though we may have missed face-to-face interactions, online events are
opportunities to remove some common barriers of in-person conferences that
disproportionately affect underrepresented groups: finding the money for
registration, transportation and accommodation; managing the logistics of
long-distance travel, and passing through discriminatory visa applications,
among others (Niner and Wassermann, Front. Mar. Sci. 2021; Nature 569, 297-299;
2019).

As organizers of the virtual useR! 2021 conference, we found the online format
to facilitate putting diversity and inclusiveness at the center: forming a
global, diverse organizing team; reaching a wider audience; reducing overall
costs to allow for fairer registration fees, and giving space for presentations
in languages other than English. Planning carefully from the start, practices
could be adopted to widen accessibility, such as using platforms that are
screen-reader-friendly and functional on limited internet, and using captions
and interpreters.

With vaccination campaigns gaining force in some countries, talk about “going
back to normal” is becoming commonplace. For scientific conferences, this risks
reverting to exclusionary practices and missing out on further opportunities for
inclusion offered by online events. We advocate for the continuation of online
formats or, if resuming in-person events, embracing truly hybrid formats. This
would mean keeping the aforementioned advantages of the online format while
benefiting from the in-person interaction. An online component should not be a
consolation prize for the people who are unable to attend in person, but a true
conference experience.

Gewin, V. What scientists should know about visa hurdles. Nature 569, 297–299
(2019).

Niner, H. J. & Wassermann, S. N. Better for Whom? Leveling the Injustices of
International Conferences by Moving Online. Front. Mar. Sci. 8, 146 (2021).

Woolston, C. Learning to love virtual conferences in the coronavirus era. Nature
582, 135-136 (2020).
